GAVEL: Graph World Models for Verified and Efficient
Long-Horizon LLM Task Planning
Ruiyang Wang, Hao-Lun Hsu, Swarajh Mehta, Jiwoo Kim, Zhihao Dou, Miroslav Pajic
Abstract— Large language models (LLMs) provide a flexible
interface for long-horizon robot planning, but generated plans
often fail to respect embodiment constraints, recover from
planning errors, or reason effectively under partial observ-
ability. We present GAVEL, a framework for verifying and
repairing long-horizon LLM planning built around an explicit
graph world model. The graph represents relevant object-
relations, action pre-conditions and effects, and probabilistic
beliefs over unobserved object locations. This model can predict
the consequences of LLM-generated actions before execution,
detect violations, and repair those whose corrections follow
directly from the world model. This method also reserves
LLM replanning solely for errors requiring semantic reasoning.
For multi-task instructions, GAVEL reasons over distributions
of possible object locations to reorder remaining subtasks
and minimize expected search cost. We evaluate GAVEL on
BEHAVIOR-1K across 100 single long-horizon tasks and 500
multi-task instructions. With Qwen3-8B, GAVEL improves
single-task success from 41.2% to 91.8% and multi-task success
from 19.9% to 92.6%. Distributional belief reasoning also
reduces travel distance by approximately 5.4% compared with
a static variant. These improvements show that an explicit
graph world model harness can substantially improve the
reliability and efficiency of long-horizon embodied planning
across compact local and frontier hosted LLM capabilities.
I. INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) offer a promising ap-
proach for translating natural-language instructions into a
long-horizon sequence of robot actions [1], [2], [3], [4].
However, the resulting plans are not always executable: they
may omit prerequisite actions, violate embodiment con-
straints, or end without reaching the intended state. It was
shown that LLMs are unreliable as standalone planners [5],
with failure rates that grow with planning horizon, partic-
ularly with compact models intended for edge deployment.
This motivates pairing language semantics with an explicit
model that can verify a plan before execution [6].
Scene-graph methods (e.g., SayPlan [7]) adopt a propose-
and-check loop: a structured environment model symboli-
cally executes the candidate plan, and infeasible actions are
returned to the LLM for another attempt. Yet, recovering
from an error does not always require invoking an LLM. For
example, when a grasp fails for insufficient proximity, the
appropriate recovery action follows directly from the violated
precondition. Since the graph that detects the failure already
determines its correction, calling an LLM raises cost and
risks introducing additional errors.
Such localized repairs are exactly the operations used
by EPoG [8]-style planners, which synthesize entire plans
from graph edits between the current and goal scene graphs.
However, while graph-edit planning is fast and reliable for
Fig. 1.
BEHAVIOR-1K [15] example for long-horizon planning under par-
tial observability. GAVEL verifies and repairs inconsistent LLM plans and
uses object-location beliefs to reorder tasks online (i.e., during execution).
spatial rearrangement, it cannot express complex semantic
goals (e.g., “wash the plate”) that require a sequence of
actions, rather than a simple change in the object relations
(e.g., EPoG only supports pick and place).
This motivates treating the graph not as a passive verifier,
but as a world model: one that simulates the outcome of
each action and applies the repairs implied by its modeled
state transitions, reserving the LLM call for failures that
genuinely require semantic reasoning. Unlike a verifier, such
a model could also capture what the robot does not yet know.
A robot may know an environment’s layout while remain-
ing uncertain where task-relevant objects are; this matters
most when an instruction contains several subtasks, since
searching for one object updates the beliefs about the others
and can change which task is cheapest to do next. Semantic
priors can guide the search for unseen objects [9], [10], [11],
[12] and belief-space planning adjusts as observations resolve
uncertainty [13], [14], but collapsing each belief to its most
likely outcome and fixing task order at initialization leaves
this information unused.
Consequently, this work introduces GAVEL: Graph World
Models for Verified and Efficient Long-Horizon LLM Plan-
ning. GAVEL uses one explicit graph world model as the
substrate for semantic LLM planning, symbolic consequence
reasoning, and probabilistic environment beliefs. Given an
LLM-generated plan, GAVEL rolls its actions forward on
arXiv:2609.19315v1  [cs.RO]  16 Sep 2026

the graph, verifies preconditions, goal completion, and safety
constraints, and directly repairs model-derivable failures.
Under partial observability, the graph maintains distributions
over the locations of unseen objects and converts them into
expected search and navigation costs. After each completed
task, new observations update these beliefs and GAVEL
reoptimizes the remaining task order.
Specifically, the main contributions of this work are:
• A graph world model that verifies LLM plans against
action preconditions, goal completion, and safety. It
repairs the failures its own action semantics determine,
and passes only semantic failures back to the LLM.
• An extension to partially observed multi-task execution
that retains full distributions over unobserved object
locations, converts them into expected search cost, and
re-optimizes the remaining task order online.
• An evaluation on BEHAVIOR-1K [15] across single
long-horizon tasks, and partially observed multi-task
instructions. On tests with both local and hosted LLMs,
we demonstrate substantial improvements in task suc-
cess and execution efficiency, and show that explicit
world-model reasoning remains complementary to in-
creasing LLM capability.
II. RELATED WORK
A. LLMs for Embodied Task Planning
LLMs are increasingly used as high-level planners for
embodied agents. SayCan [1] scores candidate actions
by learned affordances, Code as Policies [3] and Prog-
Prompt [16] have the LLM write executable policies directly,
and LLM-Planner [4] and Inner Monologue [2] replan from
observed or reported feedback. A second group pairs the
LLM with explicit solvers instead. LLM+P [17] formulates
the problem for a classical planner, while PRoC3S [18]
and Text2Motion [19] check constraint satisfaction before
execution. The prior works consistently show that an explicit
model’s feedback improves the reliability of task planning.
B. Scene-Graph Grounding and Verification
Graph structures have recently been explored as explicit
world representations for agent reasoning, from a general
Graph World Model for structured and multimodal predic-
tion [20] to AriGraph [21], which learns a knowledge-graph
world model with semantic and episodic memory for LLM
agents. In robotics, scene graphs offer a natural planning
substrate by grounding objects, spatial relations, and states
directly [22], [23]. SayPlan [7] and VeriGraph [24] use them
only for pre-execution verification, and LookPlanGraph [25]
refines them online via VLMs. GAVEL instead treats the
graph as a full world model, representing action transitions
and uncertainty for subsequent planning.
C. Graph Planning under Partial Observability
Scene graphs can serve as persistent representations as an
environment is incrementally observed [26], [27], [28]. When
task-relevant objects remain unseen, semantic knowledge can
guide where to search. PONI [9] learns semantic potential
functions over the unexplored space, SEEK [11] combines
a dynamic scene graph with a Relational Semantic Network
(RSN) to predict likely object locations, and L3MVN [10]
and COMRES-VLM [12] use LLM/VLM commonsense to
guide exploration. GAVEL follows SEEK’s RSN formulation
for initializing room-location beliefs, while retaining the
resulting distribution for downstream planning.
EPoG [8] is the closest baseline to GAVEL under partial
observability. It maintains a belief graph of observed and
predicted objects and constructs the global plan directly
from graph edits toward the goal, using an LLM mainly
for situated local replanning as observations arrive. GAVEL
reverses this division of responsibility: the LLM generates
the semantic procedure, while the graph acts as an explicit
world model that rolls the plan forward, detects violations,
and directly repairs failures whose corrections are implied
by the modeled action semantics. Only failures requiring
additional semantic reasoning are returned to the LLM.
GAVEL further retains full distributions over unobserved
object locations and uses them to estimate execution costs
and reoptimize task order online. This connects GAVEL to
prior work on belief-space replanning [13], [14] and multi-
task subgoal selection [29].
III. PROBLEM DEFINITION
A. Problem Statement
Consider a robot in an indoor environment with room
instances R of semantic type τ : R →T , where T is the set
of semantic types (e.g., {kitchen, dining room, etc.}), and
task-relevant objects O with categories c(o). We represent
the environment by a typed scene graph defined as:
G = (V, E, Φ),
V = R ∪O ∪{ρ},
(1)
where ρ is the robot, E
represents relations includ-
ing {near, under, room connect, room inside, object inside,
on top, next to, holding}, and Φ contains the unary flags
{open, toggled, cooked, washed, dried}. We distinguish the
hidden physical state G⋆
t from the robot’s believed graph Gt,
for execution step t ∈{0, . . . , H −1}.
We assume that the room layout (R, τ) and its connectiv-
ity are known, and object relations specified by the instruc-
tion or already observed are represented deterministically in
Gt. The room locations of remaining unobserved objects are
uncertain. Let xt ∈R denote the robot’s room at step t.
The robot acts through grounded primitives at = (α, ξ) ∈
A, where α is the action type and ξ its argument. Each prim-
itive has graph-valued preconditions and effects ⟨prea, effa⟩
defining the transition model
f(G, a) =
(
effa(G),
if prea(G) holds,
⊥,
otherwise,
(2)
where ⊥denotes an invalid transition. A plan π
=
⟨a0, . . . , aH−1⟩is applicable from G0 if every action sat-
isfies its preconditions along the induced trace. GAVEL
uses (2) as its predictive world model, while physical execu-
tion evolves the hidden state G⋆
t . The environment is partially

observed, so we maintain a belief over the room locations
of uncertain objects,
Bt = {bt
o}o∈O,
bt
o(r) = P (room(o) = r | Ht) ,
(3)
where Ht is the history of actions and observations up to
step t. The observation at each step, zt, is updated through
the sensor model Ξ as: zt = Ξ(xt, G⋆
t ).
For each uncertain object, the observation either localizes
it, if present, or prunes the observed room from its candidate
set if absent. The belief is updated and actions are selected
by an execution policy µ from the belief state,
Bt+1 = Υ(Bt, at, zt+1),
at = µ(Gt, Bt),
while G⋆
t is revealed only through observations.
An instruction I is decomposed into N tasks {Ii}N
i=1 with
partial-graph goals {gi}N
i=1, each specifying relations and
unary states that must hold at termination. The overall goal
is g = SN
i=1 gi, satisfied when unmet(g, G) = ∅. We addi-
tionally impose a trace-level safety predicate safe(a0:H−1),
capturing restoration requirements such as closing opened
containers and switching off safety-critical appliances.
We consider multi-task instructions whose tasks are inde-
pendent by construction. Their goal-object sets are disjoint,
obj(gi) ∩obj(gj) = ∅for i ̸= j, so every ordering is
admissible and ordering affects execution cost rather than
goal feasibility. Generated subplans may nevertheless interact
through auxiliary objects or state changes, motivating explicit
validation of their composition.
Problem: Verified Multi-Task Planning under Partial
Observability. Given an instruction I, an initial believed
graph G0 with belief B0, and an unknown initial physical
state G⋆
0 consistent with B0, find a policy µ ∈M minimizing
the expected physical execution distance, where M denotes
the set of admissible policies of the form µ(Gt, Bt) ∈A:
µ⋆= arg min
µ∈M EG⋆
0∼B0,µ [Cexec(µ)] .
(4)
where
Cexec(µ) =
H−1
X
t=0
ℓ(at; G⋆
t ),
(5)
subject to
unmet(g, G⋆
H) = ∅,
safe(a0:H−1) holds,
preat(G⋆
t ) holds,
G⋆
t+1 = f(G⋆
t , at),
at = µ(Gt, Bt),
zt+1 = Ξ(xt+1, G⋆
t+1),
Bt+1 = Υ(Bt, at, zt+1).
Here ℓ(at; G⋆
t ) is the physical navigation distance incurred
by at, and the constraints hold for all t ∈{0, . . . , H −1}.
Problem III-A couples two difficulties. First, an LLM-
generated plan is not guaranteed to satisfy the transition
constraints in (2), so executability must be checked explicitly.
Second, execution cost depends on uncertain object locations
and changes as observations update Bt. GAVEL addresses
both through a common graph world model: explicit action
semantics support verification and repair, while the evolving
belief supports uncertainty-aware task ordering.
B. Belief-Aware Task Ordering
For a multi-task instruction, GAVEL selects remaining
task execution order to minimize expected travel under cur-
rent belief Bt. For an unlocalized object o, let (r1, . . . , rK)
denote its reachable candidate rooms, ordered by decreasing
bt
o(r) where shortest-path distance breaks ties. If o is found
in the k-th searched room, the incurred search cost is
κk = D(xt, r1) +
k−1
X
m=1
[s(rm) + D(rm, rm+1)] + ηs(rk),
where
D(·, ·)
is
the
shortest-path
distance,
s(r)
=
Atrav(r)/wcov approximates the full search cost of room
r, Atrav(r) is the traversable area of room r, wcov is the
effective sensor coverage width, and η ∈[0, 1] is the expected
fraction searched before detection. The expected cost of
reaching an unlocalized object is
Csrch(xt, o; Bt) = 1
Zt
K
X
k=1
bt
o(rk)κk,
Zt =
K
X
k=1
bt
o(rk).
If o is localized, we use its geometric navigation cost,
Cloc(qt, o) = dnav(qt, po),
(6)
where qt and po denote the robot and object positions. These
costs are used during belief-conditioned rollouts to estimate
the cost of executing each task and transitioning between.
Specifically, let h[j] denote the expected cost of executing
task j first from the current state (xt, Bt), and let A[i, j]
denote the expected cost of executing task j after task i. For
an ordering ς = (ς1, . . . , ςN), we approximate its expected
execution cost by
J(ς) = h[ς1] +
N
X
p=2
A[ςp−1, ςp].
(7)
Constructing (h, A) requires O(N 2) belief-conditioned roll-
outs. GAVEL executes only the first task of the minimum-
cost ordering, updates Bt using the resulting observations,
and recomputes the ordering for the remaining tasks. Since
N ≤5 in our experiments, all candidate permutations are
enumerated and Eq. (7) is minimized exactly.
IV. METHOD
A. System Overview
GAVEL combines semantic LLM planning with an explicit
graph world model for verified, belief-aware long-horizon
execution. As shown in Fig. 2 and Alg. 1, an instruction I
is first decomposed into tasks {Ii}N
i=1. Task understanding
extracts the entities, relations, and goals needed to initialize
the graph, while the RSN assigns room-location beliefs to
uncertain objects.
A single LLM query then produces an action plan πi per
task. The graph world model rolls each plan forward, repairs
model-derivable failures, and returns unresolved violations to
the LLM at most T (e.g., 5) times. Once verified, GAVEL
orders the plans by the cost in Eq. (7) under the current
belief. After each completed task, new observations update
the belief and the remaining order is reoptimized.

Fig. 2. Overview of the GAVEL pipeline. The instruction is decomposed into tasks, objects, and extracted goals. Uncertain objects receive
RSN predicted location beliefs. An LLM query generates task plans, which the graph world model verifies and repairs before execution.
GAVEL then updates beliefs from observations and reorders the remaining tasks online.
B. Task Understanding
For each decomposed task Ii, GAVEL extracts (i) task-
relevant objects and relations to initialize the belief graph
and (ii) goal states used to evaluate task completion (Fig. 2).
Both mappings use lightweight LoRA adapters of Qwen3-
1.7B. These are shared by all planner models and baselines.
a) Task-relevant
object
extraction:
The
grounding
adapter maps Ii
to an object set Oi
and explicitly
stated relations Ei, which are inserted directly into the
believed graph rather than inferred from semantic pri-
ors. For example, “get the potato from the fridge” yields
inside(potato, fridge), localizing the potato through
the fridge. Only objects whose locations remain uncertain
are passed to the RSN:
Oqry
i
= {o ∈Oi : room(o) is uncertain in Ei},
(8)
b) Task-goal extraction: A second adapter maps Ii to a
partial-graph gi describing the goal terminal state. It contains
spatial predicates like on top(o1, o2) and inside(o1, o2),
and semantic states like washed(o), and dried(o).
Both adapters operate on natural-language instruction and
are trained on 8,000 synthetic instruction–target pairs with a
disjoint 500-instruction validation set.
C. Belief Initialization
For each uncertain object o ∈S
i Oqry
i
, GAVEL initializes
a room-location belief using a Relational Semantic Network
(RSN), following SEEK [11]. A frozen text encoder ϕ(o) ∈
R384 followed by an MLP fθ predicts a score for each room
type τ ∈T :
o
ϕ−→ϕ(o)
fθ
−→{ ˜fo(τ)}τ∈T .
(9)
Because the RSN predicts room types while GAVEL
reasons over room instances, each type score is distributed
uniformly among reachable instances of that type,
b0
o(r) ∝
˜fo(τ(r))
|{r′ ∈Rre : τ(r′) = τ(r)}|.
(10)
The distribution is then normalized over reachable rooms.
We use BAAI/bge-small-en-v1.5 as the frozen
encoder and a three-layer MLP with hidden dimensions 256–
128–64 and dropout 0.2. The RSN is trained from scene
object placements using weighted binary cross-entropy and
calibrated using Platt scaling.
D. LLM Action Planning
After task understanding and belief initialization, the
planner receives the instruction I, believed graph G0, pre-
dicted object-location beliefs B0, task goals {gi}N
i=1, and
the available action definitions. As shown in Alg. 1, a single
LLM query produces one grounded action sequence for each
decomposed task,
{πi}N
i=1 = LLM(I, G0, B0, {gi}N
i=1).
(11)
Each resulting πi is then passed to the graph world model
for validation and repair. If a violation cannot be resolved
from the modeled action semantics, its structured failure
description is returned to the LLM for another planning
attempt, up to a budget number of calls T.
E. Graph World Model
The graph world model provides the symbolic transition
used to predict the consequences of LLM-generated actions.
GAVEL operates over nine grounded primitives,
A = {NAVIGATETO, GRASP, RELEASE, PLACEONTOP,
PLACEINSIDE, OPEN, CLOSE, TOGGLEON, TOGGLEOFF}.

Algorithm 1 GAVEL
Require: instruction I; believed graph G0; LLM budget T
1: {Ii}N
i=1 ←DECOMPOSE(I)
2: for i = 1 to N do
3:
(Oi, Ei) ←EXTRACTOBJECTS(Ii)
4:
Oqry
i
←UNCERTAIN(Oi, Ei)
5:
gi ←PARSEGOAL(Ii)
G0 ←INSERT(G0, Ei)
6: end for
7: B0 ←RSN(S
i Oqry
i
, G0)
8: p ←PROMPT(I, G0, B0, {gi})
9: for iter = 1 to T do
10:
{πi}N
i=1 ←PARSE(LLM(p))
11:
for i = 1 to N do
12:
πi ←REPAIR(G0, πi, gi)
13:
ωi ←VALIDATE(G0, πi, gi)
14:
end for
15:
if all ωi are valid then
16:
break
17:
end if
18:
p ←COMPLAINT(I, G0, {πi, ωi})
19: end for
20: U ←{1, . . . , N},
(G, B) ←(G0, B0)
21: while U ̸= ∅do
22:
(h, A) ←ROLLOUT(U, B, x)
23:
Σ ←SORTJ(Perm(U))
24:
for ς ∈Σ do
25:
ω ←VALIDATE

G, L|U|
j=1 πςj, S
i∈U gi

26:
if ω is valid then
27:
break
28:
end if
29:
end for
30:
(G, z) ←EXECUTE(πς1)
31:
B ←Υ(B, πς1, z)
U ←U \ {ς1}
32: end while
Each grounded action a = (α, ξ) has modeled preconditions
and effects ⟨prea, effa⟩, defining the transition in Eq. (2).
The preconditions capture four forms of executability:
proximity, requiring the robot to be near the interaction
target; affordance, requiring the target to support the re-
quested action; gripper state, enforcing holding constraints;
and accessibility, requiring enclosing containers to be open.
NAVIGATETO establishes proximity but cannot target an
object hidden inside a closed container.
Action effects update graph relations and object states.
GRASP establishes the holding relation, placement transfers
the held object to its destination, and appliance operation
can induce semantic states such as cooked, washed, or dried.
GAVEL also tracks restoration constraints: containers opened
during a plan must be closed, and safety-critical appliances
switched on must later be switched off.
F. Plan Validation and Repair
Given a candidate plan πi = ⟨a0, . . . , aH−1⟩, GAVEL
predicts its consequences by rolling the actions forward
on the graph world model. Each action is applied only if
Algorithm 2 REPAIR: Model-derived plan repair
Require: believed graph G, plan π, goal g
1: π⋆←π
ω⋆←VALIDATE(G, π⋆, g)
S ←{π}
2: loop
3:
ω ←VALIDATE(G, π, g)
4:
if rk(ω, π) > rk(ω⋆, π⋆) then
5:
(π⋆, ω⋆) ←(π, ω)
6:
end if
7:
if ω.app and ω.safe and ω.unmet = ∅then
8:
return π
9:
end if
10:
if no model-derived edit exists for ω then
11:
break
12:
end if
13:
π′ ←EDIT(π, ω, g)
14:
if π′ ∈S then
15:
break
16:
end if
17:
S ←S ∪{π′}
π ←π′
18: end loop
19: return π⋆
its preconditions hold. Otherwise rollout stops at the first
violation. The resulting graph is then checked against goal
gi and trace-level safety constraints. A plan is valid iff
unmet(gi, GH) = ∅
and
safe(πi).
(12)
The validator returns a structured verdict ω identifying appli-
cability failures, unmet goal conditions, and safety violations.
Many such failures imply their own corrections. As sum-
marized in Alg. 2, REPAIR recursively applies edits whose
effects follow directly from the action model: a failed grasp
due to missing proximity induces NAVIGATETO, and an
object inside a closed container induces navigation to the
container followed by OPEN. Safety violations similarly
induce restoration actions. When no model-derived repair
exists, the unresolved verdict is returned to the LLM as
structured feedback. The visited set S prevents cyclic repair
by ending when an edit leads to a previously considered plan.
Because successive edits may not monotonically improve
a plan, GAVEL retains the best previous candidate:
rk(ω, π) = (1[ω.app], 1[ω.unmet = ∅], 1[ω.safe], −ω.d) .
where ω.d defines the execution cost of the plan. Thus, the
budget T limits LLM generations, while graph-derived repair
may perform multiple edits between two LLM queries.
G. Belief-Aware Multi-Task Execution
Once the task plans are repaired and verified, GAVEL de-
termines which remaining task to execute next under current
belief Bt. At each task boundary, ROLLOUT constructs the
first-task costs h and pairwise transition costs A using the
cost model in Sec. III-B. Eq. (7) evaluates every permutation
of the remaining task set U. GAVEL sorts these orderings
by increasing expected cost and validates each one’s con-
catenated plans against the union of the corresponding goals,

selecting the first that passes. If the cheapest ordering causes
cross-task interference, the next is considered instead.
Only the first task of the selected ordering is executed.
The resulting observations update the beliefs of all uncertain
objects: observed objects become localized, while searched
rooms in which an object is not seen are removed from its
belief support. GAVEL then rebuilds (h, A) and reoptimizes
the remaining order, so information gathered during one task
immediately affects the schedule of those that follow.
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
A. Simulation Setup
We evaluate GAVEL at the symbolic action level of
BEHAVIOR-1K, as our focus is high-level task planning
rather than low-level manipulation. For large-scale evalua-
tion, we implement the BEHAVIOR-1K action transitions in
a lightweight 2-D executor retaining the original floor plans,
object properties, task predicates, and navigation geometry.
Navigation is geometric: traversability maps are eroded by
the robot base radius and paths are planned with A⋆. Unseen
objects are searched through frontier-based exploration with
a wedge-shaped camera. A completed room search localizes
observed objects and rules that room out for unobserved
ones. For the ordering cost model, we use wcov = 1.2 m.
The action space is unchanged: all nine primitives map one-
to-one onto the BEHAVIOR-1K/OmniGibson interface, and
every benchmark task is directly executable in OmniGibson.
To validate the abstraction, we ran all 100 single-task in-
structions in OmniGibson; success outcomes agreed with the
executor on every instance. The executor reduces execution
time from roughly 17 minutes per plan to about one second,
enabling 5,500 evaluations at scale. The supplementary video
shows GAVEL executing example tasks in OmniGibson.
We measure Success with the executor after the plan
is simulated, Distance as how far the robot travels, and
Planning time as decomposition, LLM calls, repair, and
ordering, measured on an idle GPU. Results are averaged
over five random seeds and reported as mean ± std.
B. Benchmarks
Prior work in this setting typically evaluates on relatively
small task sets: five object-transport tasks across 46 scenes in
EPoG [8], and 90 instructions in SayPlan [7]. We follow the
same evaluation paradigm at substantially larger scale, first
verifying every reference plan in our executor so measured
failures reflect planning rather than invalid specifications.
The single-task benchmark holds 100 long-horizon tasks
across 10 scenes: fetching objects, opening containers, oper-
ating appliances, and delivering things to a specified desti-
nation. Reference plans average 12.2 primitives (8–17) and
collectively include 240 goal predicates. The multi-task
benchmark holds 500 instructions over the scenes, each with
N ∈{2, 3, 4, 5} independent tasks, averaging 18.8 primitives
across 4.66 rooms. Of these, 199 need a semantic state that
only operating an appliance can produce.
TABLE I
EXPERIMENT 1: 100 SINGLE LONG-HORIZON TASKS.
Model
Method
Success (%) Average Attempt
Time (s)
Qwen3-4B llm-only
21.8 ± 1.5
1.00 ± 0.0
9.2 ± 1.0
Qwen3-4B sayplan
55.4 ± 1.9
3.4 ± 1.7
27.6 ± 12.0
Qwen3-4B gavel-basic 67.7 ± 1.6
1.00 ± 0.0
9.2 ± 1.0
Qwen3-4B gavel
88.8 ± 1.6
1.7 ± 1.3
15.0 ± 11.1
Qwen3-8B llm-only
41.2 ± 1.2
1.00 ± 0.0
13.3 ± 6.4
Qwen3-8B sayplan
76.4 ± 1.5
2.7 ± 1.7
24.6 ± 15.8
Qwen3-8B gavel-basic 76.2 ± 1.2
1.00 ± 0.0
13.5 ± 6.4
Qwen3-8B gavel
91.8 ± 1.3
1.5 ± 1.1
15.5 ± 9.4
C. Compared Methods
Every method sees the same initial state, LLM budget, and
believed graph; the SayPlan and EPoG baselines reproduce
their relevant mechanism inside this shared pipeline.
llm-only generates one plan and runs it. sayplan
adds the validation-feedback loop of [7] with up to T LLM
re-calls, isolating feedback without repair. epog derives
actions from the difference between the believed and goal
graphs, ordered by travel cost [8], isolating planning from
graph-state differences alone. oracle uses ground-truth
locations and reference subplans as a cost reference.
Among our variants, gavel-basic takes one LLM
proposal and then relies only on graph repair, isolating re-
pair without feedback. gavel-map commits each uncertain
object to its most likely room and fixes the order up front;
gavel-static keeps the full distribution but still fixes
the order. Finally, gavel keeps the distribution and reorders
after every finished task.
D. Belief and Cost-Model Quality
The RSN trains on 11,218 placements across 51 scenes,
197 object categories, and 37 room types, with scenes held
out. It reaches an AUC of 0.904 and a Brier score of 0.057.
Still, the most likely room is a poor summary of that belief:
across 832 held-out queries the true room ranks first only
47% of the time, so collapsing bo to ˆro discards information.
The pairwise cost model tracks what the robot actually
drives, at R2 = 0.93 for four-task and R2 = 0.89 for
five-task instructions, which is what justifies the O(N 2)
construction instead of rolling out every permutation.
E. Experiment 1: Single Long-Horizon Task Reliability
We first ask whether an LLM can reliably generate a
complete long-horizon plan before considering partial ob-
servability or multi-task scheduling. As shown in Table I,
LLM-only planning is highly unreliable for the compact
models: Qwen3-4B and Qwen3-8B succeed on only 21.8%
and 41.2% of tasks, confirming that simply generating a plan
and executing it is insufficient at these horizons.
A common alternative is to detect an invalid plan and re-
turn the failure to the LLM for replanning, as in SayPlan and
related feedback-based approaches [7], [2]. This improves
success to 55.4% and 76.4%, but requires 3.4 and 2.7 LLM
calls per task. More importantly, feedback does not guarantee
that a compact LLM will correctly repair the reported error.

Fig. 3. Failure breakdown for Qwen3-8B GAVEL in Experiment 1.
The figure shows remaining failures after each pipeline step.
TABLE II
EXPERIMENT 2: 500 MULTI-TASK INSTRUCTIONS USING QWEN3-8B.
Method
Success (%)
Distance (m)
Time (s)
llm-only
19.9 ± 0.7
86.69 ± 0.37
31.8 ± 10.5
sayplan
75.6 ± 2.1
83.01 ± 0.42
51.4 ± 27.6
epog
60.2 ± 0.0
84.51 ± 0.00
13.9 ± 3.9
gavel-map
92.6 ± 1.0
82.45 ± 0.23
39.3 ± 22.6
gavel-static
92.6 ± 1.0
79.69 ± 0.45
39.3 ± 22.6
gavel
92.6 ± 1.0
78.01 ± 0.71
39.3 ± 22.6
oracle
100.0 ± 0.0
56.17 ± 0.00
—
Graph-derived repair addresses this limitation directly.
Consider gavel-basic, a variant that only performs graph
repairs and never re-queries the LLM. It already reaches
67.7% with Qwen3-4B and 76.2% with Qwen3-8B. On
Qwen3-4B this exceeds feedback-only replanning by 12.3
points using 1 rather than 3.4 queries, and on Qwen3-8B
it matches it at the same cost. When GAVEL additionally
returns only the remaining semantic failures to the LLM,
success rises to 88.8% and 91.8% with just 1.7 and 1.5
calls on average. The graph thus handles failures implied by
action semantics, while LLM replanning is reserved for those
that genuinely require semantic reasoning. For Qwen3-4B
this also cuts planning time from 27.6 s under feedback-only
replanning to 15.0 s. Fig. 3 shows the failure breakdown for
a representative Qwen3-8B run, illustrating how errors are
removed across the pipeline and which remain.
F. Experiment 2: Long-Horizon Multi-Task Execution
Having established reliable single-task planning, we next
consider long-horizon instructions containing multiple tasks
under partial observability. Here failures compound: although
each component task is shorter than in Experiment 1 (4.86
versus 12.2 reference primitives), the complete instruction’s
success is dependent on all component plans. As a result,
llm-only completes just 19.9% instructions.
Verification and repair remain important at this scale.
The SayPlan-style baseline, which returns graph-validation
failures to the LLM but performs no graph-derived repair,
reaches 75.6%; GAVEL completes 92.6%. GAVEL also
reduces traveled distance from 83.01 m to 78.01 m on the
matched sets both methods succeeded, and planning time
by roughly 12 s per instruction. Repeatedly asking the LLM
is therefore not equivalent to directly correcting failures the
action model has already determined.
TABLE III
EXPERIMENT 3: LOCAL AND HOSTED PLANNERS ON THE SAME
100-INSTRUCTION SUBSET.
Success (%)
Time (s)
Planner
LLM
GAVEL
LLM
GAVEL
Qwen3-4B
2.4 ± 1.5
75.2 ± 2.1
23.0 ± 7.4
35.0 ± 31.2
Qwen3-8B
23.6 ± 1.5 89.2 ± 1.3 31.8 ± 10.5 39.3 ± 22.6
GPT-5.6 Sol
24.6 ± 3.9 99.2 ± 0.8
16.5 ± 3.9
16.5 ± 4.0
Claude Sonnet 5 38.6 ± 2.2 99.4 ± 0.5
18.0 ± 4.4
18.2 ± 4.4
The EPoG-style baseline exposes the complementary lim-
itation of graph-only procedure generation. It plans by trans-
forming the believed graph toward the goal graph and
succeeds on 60.2% of instructions. Its failures correspond
exactly to the instructions requiring an appliance-induced se-
mantic state (e.g., cooked, washed, or dried); “wash the
plate” requires inferring that the dishwasher must be run, a
procedure the graph-state difference alone cannot specify.
This motivates keeping the LLM as the high-level semantic
planner, while the graph world model determines if the
LLM’s procedure is executable and repairs inconsistencies.
GAVEL’s own 38 residual failures on Experiment 2 lie
mostly upstream of planning: 21 due to object extraction,
with only 5 unexecutable plans, and 9 unmet goals.
Finally, we isolate GAVEL’s uncertainty reasoning. Dis-
tributional beliefs reduce mean distance from 82.45 m with
gavel-map to 79.69 m with gavel-static, and online
reordering after each completed task further reduces it to
78.01 m. Together these save 4.45 m, or ≈5.4%, while the
ordering optimization itself takes only 17 ms per instruction.
G. Experiment 3: Does Model Scaling Replace GAVEL?
Finally, we ask if the above gains could instead be obtained
by replacing compact local models with stronger LLMs. We
evaluate all planners on the same 100-instruction subset of
the multi-task benchmark, selecting every fifth instruction.
Scaling alone improves semantic planning but does not
eliminate long-horizon failures. Without GAVEL, Qwen3-4B
and Qwen3-8B solve only 2.4% and 23.6% of the subset,
while GPT-5.6 Sol and Claude Sonnet 5 reach 24.6% and
38.6%. In contrast, Qwen3-4B with GAVEL reaches 75.2%,
substantially outperforming the hosted models used alone.
The gain from explicit world-model reasoning therefore
seems to persist despite increasing LLM capability.
Scaling and GAVEL are complementary. With GAVEL,
Qwen3-8B reaches 89.2% and both hosted models reach
near-perfect success on this subset. Stronger LLMs reduce
the remaining semantic planning errors, while GAVEL re-
moves the action-level applicability and consistency failures
that persist even for frontier models.
This is also inexpensive for the hosted models: planning
time remains 16.5 s for GPT-5.6 Sol and changes only from
18.0 to 18.2 s for Claude Sonnet 5. The additional cost for
compact models therefore comes from further LLM planning
attempts rather than from graph verification and repair.

VI. CONCLUSION
We presented GAVEL, a framework for long-horizon LLM
planning built around an explicit graph world model repre-
senting object relations, action preconditions and effects, and
beliefs over unobserved object locations. GAVEL rolls LLM-
generated plans forward before execution, repairs failures
whose corrections follow from the modeled action semantics,
and reserves LLM queries for failures requiring semantic
reasoning. Under partial observability, it uses distributional
beliefs to estimate execution costs and reoptimizes the re-
maining task order as observations arrive.
Our results highlight the benefit of this division of re-
sponsibility. On BEHAVIOR-1K, graph-derived repair alone
raises Qwen3-4B single-task success to 67.7%, exceeding
feedback-only replanning. Allowing LLM re-queries for
unresolved semantic failures further raises this to 88.8%.
World-model reasoning is also complementary to scaling:
Qwen3-4B with GAVEL outperforms stronger hosted plan-
ners when used alone, while both hosted models reach near-
perfect success when combined with GAVEL. Retaining full
object-location distributions and reoptimizing online further
reduces traveled distance by approximately 5.4%.
Finally, our evaluation uses symbolic manipulation, so the
graph captures logical action consequences but not geometric
feasibility. Adding motion-level reachability and collision
constraints would extend the same verify-and-repair mecha-
nism to physical execution. The semantic prior is conditioned
primarily on room type, and improving it based on repeated
observations could capture environment-specific regularities.
Finally, most residual failures now arise in grounding the
instruction rather than planning over the graph, pointing to
instruction understanding as the next bottleneck.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, B. David,
C. Finn, C. Fu, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman et al., “Do as i
can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
[2] W. Huang, F. Xia, T. Xiao, H. Chan, J. Liang, P. Florence, A. Zeng,
J. Tompson, I. Mordatch, Y. Chebotar et al., “Inner monologue:
Embodied reasoning through planning with language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
[3] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence,
and A. Zeng, “Code as policies: Language model programs for em-
bodied control,” in 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. on robotics and automation
(ICRA).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 9493–9500.
[4] C. H. Song, J. Wu, C. Washington, B. M. Sadler, W.-L. Chao, and
Y. Su, “Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents
with large language models,” in IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. on computer
vision, 2023, pp. 2998–3009.
[5] K. Valmeekam, M. Marquez, S. Sreedharan, and S. Kambhampati, “On
the planning abilities of large language models-a critical investigation,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 36, pp.
75 993–76 005, 2023.
[6] S. Kambhampati, K. Valmeekam, L. Guan, M. Verma, K. Stechly,
S. Bhambri, L. Saldyt, and A. Murthy, “Llms can’t plan, but
can help planning in llm-modulo frameworks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.01817, 2024.
[7] K. Rana, J. Haviland, S. Garg, J. Abou-Chakra, I. Reid, and
N. Suenderhauf, “Sayplan: Grounding large language models using
3d scene graphs for scalable robot task planning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.06135, 2023.
[8] H. Yang, Z. Jiao, S. Wang, Y. Niu, S. Liu, and H. Liu, “Integrated
exploration and sequential manipulation on scene graph with llm-based
situated replanning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.04419, 2026.
[9] S. K. Ramakrishnan, D. S. Chaplot, Z. Al-Halah, J. Malik, and
K. Grauman, “Poni: Potential functions for objectgoal navigation with
interaction-free learning,” in 2022 CVPR, 2022, pp. 18 868–18 878.
[10] B. Yu, H. Kasaei, and M. Cao, “L3mvn: Leveraging large language
models for visual target navigation,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2023, pp. 3554–3560.
[11] M. F. Ginting, S.-K. Kim, D. Fan, M. Palieri, M. Kochenderfer,
and A. Agha-Mohammadi, “Seek: Semantic reasoning for object goal
navigation in real world inspection tasks,” arXiv:2405.09822, 2024.
[12] R. Wang, H.-L. Hsu, D. Hunt, J. Kim, S. Luo, and M. Pajic, “Comres-
vlm: Coordinated multi-robot exploration and search using vision
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26324, 2025.
[13] C. R. Garrett, C. Paxton, T. Lozano-P´erez, L. P. Kaelbling, and D. Fox,
“Online replanning in belief space for partially observable task and
motion problems,” in 2020 ICRA.
IEEE, 2020, pp. 5678–5684.
[14] A. Curtis, G. Matheos, N. Gothoskar, V. Mansinghka, J. Tenenbaum,
T. Lozano-P´erez, and L. P. Kaelbling, “Partially observable task and
motion planning with uncertainty and risk awareness,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.10454, 2024.
[15] C. Li, R. Zhang, J. Wong, C. Gokmen, S. Srivastava, R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın,
C. Wang, G. Levine, M. Lingelbach, J. Sun et al., “Behavior-1k: A
benchmark for embodied ai with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic
simulation,” in Conf. on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 80–93.
[16] I. Singh, V. Blukis, A. Mousavian, A. Goyal, D. Xu, J. Tremblay,
D. Fox, J. Thomason, and A. Garg, “Progprompt: Generating situ-
ated robot task plans using large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.11302, 2022.
[17] B. Liu, Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, S. Zhang, J. Biswas, and P. Stone,
“Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning
proficiency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11477, 2023.
[18] A. Curtis, N. Kumar, J. Cao, T. Lozano-P´erez, and L. P. Kaelbling,
“Trust the proc3s: Solving long-horizon robotics problems with llms
and constraint satisfaction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05572, 2024.
[19] K. Lin, C. Agia, T. Migimatsu, M. Pavone, and J. Bohg, “Text2motion:
From natural language instructions to feasible plans,” Autonomous
Robots, vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1345–1365, 2023.
[20] T. Feng, Y. Wu, G. Lin, and J. You, “Graph world model,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.10539, 2025.
[21] P. Anokhin, N. Semenov, A. Sorokin, D. Evseev, A. Kravchenko,
M. Burtsev, and E. Burnaev, “Arigraph: Learning knowledge graph
world models with episodic memory for llm agents,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.04363, 2024.
[22] C. Agia, K. M. Jatavallabhula, M. Khodeir, O. Miksik, V. Vineet,
M. Mukadam, L. Paull, and F. Shkurti, “Taskography: Evaluating robot
task planning over large 3d scene graphs,” in Conf. on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2022, pp. 46–58.
[23] Z. Jiao, Y. Niu, Z. Zhang, S.-C. Zhu, Y. Zhu, and H. Liu, “Sequential
manipulation planning on scene graph,” in IROS, 2022, pp. 8203–8210.
[24] D. Ekpo, M. Levy, S. Suri, C. Huynh, A. Swaminathan, and A. Shri-
vastava, “Verigraph: Scene graphs for execution verifiable robot plan-
ning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10446, 2024.
[25] A. O. Onishchenko, A. K. Kovalev, and A. I. Panov, “Lookplangraph:
Embodied instruction following method with vlm graph augmenta-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21243, 2025.
[26] S. Amiri, K. Chandan, and S. Zhang, “Reasoning with scene graphs
for robot planning under partial observability,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters (RA-L), vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 5560–5567, 2022.
[27] A. Rajvanshi, K. Sikka, X. Lin, B. Lee, H.-P. Chiu, and A. Velasquez,
“Saynav: Grounding large language models for dynamic planning to
navigation in new environments,” in Proceedings of the Int. Conf. on
Automated Planning and Scheduling, vol. 34, 2024, pp. 464–474.
[28] D. Honerkamp, M. B¨uchner, F. Despinoy, T. Welschehold, and A. Val-
ada, “Language-grounded dynamic scene graphs for interactive object
search with mobile manipulation,” IEEE RA-L, pp. 8298–8305, 2024.
[29] Z. Wang, S. Cai, G. Chen, A. Liu, X. S. Ma, and Y. Liang, “Describe,
explain, plan and select: interactive planning with llms enables open-
world multi-task agents,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 36, pp. 34 153–34 189, 2023.
